So let me comment out
these two event listeners here or these two examples
and let's dive into another kind of event
we can listen to. For this,
I'll add a form element here below my div with the buttons and in there,
I'll add a label for title which says title and an input, type text with ID title let's say, very simple
form here.
Action can be left empty
and with that, all we need to add to finish this form is a button of type
submit,
that's now important, that you set this type where we for example say submit as a caption. If you now
save this and you reload, you'll get this form.
Well the button is pretty big because it gets the same styling as up there but for this example, it doesn't
really matter.
We have this form here, we can enter something here and I can press submit and now watch closely what
happens if I do press submit here,
you see the page reloaded which reset my zoom in this case. Now it reloaded because the default behavior
for the form element in HTML combined with the submit button is to send this form data to your
server, so to the server which serves this page.
In this case we have no web server, we serve this through the file protocol but still it tries to send this
to you could say to the source which served this HTML file and this can make sense depending on which
kind of application you're building because eventually, you want to get that user input to that server
so that there you can work with it, store it in a database,
do anything like that. Often however when you use HTML, you also want to prevent this from happening,
you don't want to send that data to the server always when this button is pressed,
instead you want to step in with Javascript and maybe validate the user input before you then take it
and send it
with the help of Javascript, something we'll also dive in in a separate module,
how to send HTTP requests from inside Javascript. So you might want to prevent the default behavior of
the browser, which for a submit button in a form is to submit that form
and here again Javascript and the browser got you covered.
So let's say we want to listen to that form submission, for that in events.js
we can select our form,
maybe down there with document query selector form,
I only got one form tag in there so this will select that first and only form.
And then on that form, not on the button as you see but on the form, we can add an event listener and
there's a special submit event which the browser exposes on form elements and that is one of the rare
events which does not exist on all DOM nodes because only form elements can be submitted, only
form elements have that submit event,
again MDN also tells you that.
So here we can listen to that submit event and then execute some function when it occurs, in this function
of course again, we get an event object and we can console log that. Now as a default, you will see that
if I try to execute this and I reload this page, if I click submit here,
we briefly saw that being logged but since we send that to the server automatically and that server
or the file protocol in this case therefore reloaded the page, we lost our output there because the
page reloaded and now we can do something which we haven't done before. This event object does not just
give us a couple of properties,
it also gives us methods to control this event and there, we got a method which we can call right at
the start for example which is prevent default.
This exists on any event object in Javascript, not just for the submit event and it does what the name
implies, it prevents the default behavior
the browser would apply for this event otherwise. Now the default behavior of course depends on the kind
of event. For the submit event on a form,
the default behavior is to submit that form to a server. For a link for example, the default behavior
would be to go to that link and you can always block the browser from doing that and from following
its default behavior and then instead implement your own logic.
So now with this added, you will see that if we now reload again and I click submit, now we don't lose this
because now the page doesn't reload because now, this default of taking the form data and sending it
to a server and hence reloading the page, that is now prevented.
Of course this means now you will need to implement it on your own
and as I mentioned, we'll have a whole module where I show you how to send HTTP requests on your own from
Javascript but it's a powerful feature to be aware of because you'll often need it to build exactly
the user experience you want, where you sometimes, especially when working with forms, want to avoid
that default behavior and want to override it.